Mating and Eggs

To get things out of the way, lets describe some vanilla mating and egg mechanics as most modded Ark players have no idea how this works.
1. Creatures must be mate boosted to lay unfertilized eggs. The exceptions are dinos that poop eggs (Dodo + Kairuku).
2. Creatures must be the same species to mate. Dodo + Dodo. You cannot mate a Dodo with a Rex (people really ask this).
3. Ark Omega creatures cannot mate with vanilla creatures. They may look the same, but are not technially the same species.

First thing is your BreedingMode INI setting. This setting determines what you can mate together.
This can be changed in the Admin panel of the guide.
IF YOUR MATING TIMER IS RESETTING ON DINOS WHILE TRYING TO MATE, THIS IS THE CAUSE.
The default setting is 1, but you can change this to any of the 5 settings.
1. Same Group (Cosmic + Cosmic) but any Tier. If variants are different between the parents, one of their variants will be selected at random using spawn chance % for
those 2 variants.
2. Same Variant and Tier.
3. Any variant and any Tier. If variants are different between the parents, one of their variants will be selected at random using spawn chance % for those 2 variants.

Second is the PoopEggs INI setting. This setting bypasses the default Ark mechanic of requiring mate boosting to lay eggs.
With this setting, all creatures, even male, will have a 1% chance to produce an unfertilized egg when pooping.

Now that you have your settings determined, here are the basics of what can happen when mating.
If variants are different between the parents, the % chance of the baby's variant is based on the spawn chances of the variants of the parents. Example: Colossus and
Gorgon mate. There is amuch greater chance for a Gorgon baby than Colossus.
2. If you're breeding different Tiers, the tier can be anywhere between the 2 parents, with lower tiers being far more likely.
3. If your egg hatches a Dodo, then you're using another mod that is either picking up the eggs too soon or editing them.